Hi, I'm Iva Kraljevic
and welcome to
the podcast.
Today I have the honor
to speak with
an exceptional guest
her name is
Ramona Trevino,
if I pronounce
it correctly.
Yes, that is
correct, good job.
Ramona is a person whose
life story resonated strongly
in the pro-life community,
and today we
will hear why.
And how she went
from leading a
Planned Parenthood clinic
to becoming a passionate
advocate for the
protection of life
from conception,
and pivotal experiences
that transforemed her
along the way.
(music)
Dear Ramona,
it's really an
honor and a pleasure
having you here.
Thank you for
being here.
And thank you for
being willing to share your
powerful story with
our podcast listeners.
Well, it's definitely my
honor to be here
with you in Croatia.
Such a blessing,
so thank you. How do
you like Croatia so far?
I'm loving it,
it's beautiful.
I hope we will see
you again here.
I hope so, yes. Okay,
let's start,
shall we?
Maybe from
the beginning.
How did you end
up working for the
Planned Parenthood in
the first place?
And what made you
reconsider your role there?
Yes,
so as you can
imagine that is the
most popular question
that people have
because especially
coming from Planned
Parenthood and then
now becoming pro-life,
the first question is
how did you end
up at Planned Parenthood,
right?
And I think for
most former workers,
abortion workers,
that is probably
one of the most
common questions.
And I've spent
a lot of time,
especially
since leaving,
over the years
thinking about that
because I don't
think it's just a
very simple answer.
I think for many
of us it's more
complicated as to
how we end up at
Planned Parenthood. And I think
what
I've come to terms with
is a very easy answer,
which is satan capitalizes on
our trauma and our sin.
And he looks for an
opportunity to take
advantage of us when
we're vulnerable.
And obviously I played
a role in accepting the
position for working
for Planned Parenthood.
But then when I
dive a little deeper
into my past,
I realized why I was
so easily deceived
into believing that
I was helping women.
And that I
think came from,
I was a teen mom,
so I became pregnant
at 16 years old
and had my daughter
when I was 17.
But I was in
a very abusive relationship
with the father
of my daughter
for eight years
and then finally found
the courage to
leave that abusive relationship
and face life as
a single mother.
But I never sought
healing from that trauma.
I never sought any
type of psychological
help or therapy or I
didn't even go to God
to ask for those wounds
to be healed and there
were a lot of wounds.
And so I think,
when I think about it,
when this
opportunity presented
itself to work for
Planned Parenthood,
because abortions didn't
happen under my roof,
they weren't happening
in that center,
I thought that I
was helping prevent
young women from
experiencing the
things that I had
once experienced.
And I never stopped
to consider really what
I was involved in.
And so I think that's
probably a little
bit more of a
longer answer to it.
But the simple answer
is that's where we
often see that satan
has a way of
taking advantage of us
in our vulnerability
and in our wounds
and our hurts.
And one of the
reasons why I always encourage
people to seek healing,
whether it be
professionally from a
therapist or from
the greatest healer,
which is Jesus Christ,
who is capable of
healing all wounds
to never leave those
things unhealed
because Satan will
definitely find
a way to capitalize
on those wounds.
And what was the turning
point before that?
What did you experience at
your job that made you,
as I said, reconsider
or just maybe you
felt disappointed or
what was it like?
Yeah,
so I directed this
clinic for three
years. And I think
for a while,
especially
after leaving,
I thought,
well, I wasn't
really involved in
really truly evil
because we weren't
doing abortions.
And then God really
started to reveal to
me over time that,
yes, I was involved
in evil things.
And so if you
talk to someone who
directly worked in abortion,
who directly saw the
abortions take place,
there's a different level
to all of this,
another layer,
if you will.
And for me,
I spent those three
years justifying,
oh, well, I'm not
doing abortions here.
It's happening
somewhere else.
We're just referring
women for abortions.
And that's what was
weighing on my heart,
that I was referring
women for abortions,
but I tried the
whole time to ignore that.
But what I couldn't
ignore was that I was
helping create a
market for abortions,
because really the majority
of the women that
were coming into
Planned Parenthood
weren't women.
They were children.
And so we're
talking young girls,
you know, 15,
16, 17 years old,
who are living
promiscuously,
who are there to get
on birth control.
And then ultimately
when those things
fail and when
that lifestyle catches up
to them, if you will,
they seek abortions.
And so you're just creating
this revolving door of a
market that ultimately
leads these young
girls to abortion.
And that was weighing
heavily on my heart,
because I could see
that I wasn't helping
prevent these young women
from being in situations like
I had once been in.
The only thing I was
preventing was children,
right?
But the abuse and the
objectification that
they were subjecting
themselves to was there,
you know?
And so I was helping
perpetuate that in these
young girls' lives.
So you did refer them.
You,
can I say, sent
them to the other facility?
Yes.
To do the abortion?
Yeah, because we
were all part of
the same affiliate.
And so I think there
were maybe 26 or 27,
I don't remember
the exact number,
clinics in that Planned
Parenthood affiliate.
Two of those are where
the women went to
get their abortions.
And so everywhere
else were the family
planning centers,
but still part of
the same affiliate.
And so we were
sending everyone into those two,
you know,
either one of those two
abortion facilities.
And so at the
end of the day,
when I received
my paycheck,
you know,
with Planned
Parenthood on it,
it was still
blood money,
you know, because it was
all going into one pot,
one money pot.
And I was still
getting paid with blood money.
And I tried to
ignore that,
you know, I didn't
want to think about it.
I still wanted to
convince myself,
you know, that I was
doing good things,
that I wasn't any
different than working for
a gynecologist or any
other physician. Right.
But I realized, no,
it's not the same
thing at all.
It's an exploitation
of women and especially
young girls and
getting them really to
forget about any type
of sense of morality
when it comes to
their sexuality and
removing any type
of stigma, you know,
surrounding promiscuity
so that they can live
this life of promiscuity
that ultimately
leads to unplanned
pregnancies and
crisis pregnancies
and really difficult
situations to where
ultimately they decide
to have abortions.
What was the most
common story of those girls?
We often hear it's
probably a child
concieved in rape
or abusive relationship.
Was that the most
common story?
No,
no.
In the United States,
incest, rape,
those cases are less
than 1% of the
reasons women have abortions.
The majority of the reason
is just convenience.
It's not a good time.
A lot of times these
were young women who were
university students or
high school students.
So it just wasn't a
good thing. Right.
And of course, they
weren't married.
They were single.
And then also, of
course, the fear,
not wanting their
parents to know
or fear of, you
know, not being able
to finish school
or not being able
to follow their career paths.
You know, those
type of things.
So really, it's just
abortions out of convenience
because it's an inconvenient
time to have a baby.
And then when they
enter the Planned
Parenthood clinic,
what are the options
that are presented to them?
Abortion.
That's it.
We're not trained on
how to counsel or offer
life-affirming choices
whatsoever. Yes,
on paper,
it says that,
well,
for our
particular center,
when a young woman comes
in for a pregnancy test,
there's a question
that says,
if your pregnancy
test is positive,
what type of referral
would you like?
And then it
lists abortion,
adoption, and
prenatal care.
But if they choose something
other than abortion,
the counseling or the
referral just looks
like handing over a
pamphlet of information.
That's it.
They're not going
to receive the
type of counseling
that you would
receive at a pregnancy
resource center,
what we call
pregnancy resource
centers back home,
in which you're presenting
all of the
choices that women have
and what those
consequences of those
choices look like.
Being able to present
those to the women
so that they can
really make an informed
decision about what
they're going to do.
Because what happens with Planned
Parenthood or any other abortion
industry is they're not
presenting these young women
with all the facts.
They're not
presenting them with,
number one,
the reality of the
biological stage
in which the gestation
of their baby,
like what is going
on right now at the
gestational age of
their pregnancy,
they're not presenting
them with the facts
of what will happen
to them emotionally,
psychologically,
even spiritually,
after they have
an abortion.
A lot of these
women have no idea what
to expect after this
abortion happens.
And they paint a
very pretty picture
for these women
so that they can choose
the abortion thinking
there's not going to be
any type of consequence after.
And what
happened for you?
What happened then that
led to your conversion?
Well,
it was a process.
I think in my eyes,
it happened
very quickly.
I think for anyone
else looking in,
it probably seemed
like it took forever,
right?
But for me,
it seemed to
happen very quickly.
But it was a
beautiful process because
when I look back,
I think of how God
loves us and how He
knows how to reach everyone
and meet them
exactly where they're
at and in the way
that is necessary.
And so for me,
it was God really
guiding me gently through
this process because at
the end of the day,
it's not an easy
subject matter that
we're dealing with.
The first way in which
God reached me was
through Catholic radio,
which for me is
just great to be able
to do something like
this, a podcast,
because we never know
how God is going to
utilize these things to
reach people's hearts.
And so for me,
it was through Catholic
radio. I stumbled,
if you will,
upon Catholic
radio accidentally,
although I know it
was a God incident.
And in the subject
they were talking
about was abortion.
They were talking
about abortion with
women who had had
past abortions,
who were calling
into the program,
sharing their
very tragic,
heartbreaking stories of
their past abortions.
But then they also
spoke about
contraception and the
abortifacient
properties of hormonal
contraception.
And that was really
the first seed that God
planted in my heart
that began to really
unravel and lead me
through this complete
and total conversion from contraception
all the way to abortion.
And then ultimately, it was
through a 40 Days for
Life campaign that
the floodgates of
grace opened up,
and that's really
when things started
moving quickly.
And I realized I
needed to quit my job.
I couldn't work
there anymore.
Can you share with us
what was the show about?
What
were they saying that
changed your mind?
Well,
I don't know that it
was very dramatic.
I think more
than anything,
it was just using
basic logic and reason.
I'm a very
logical person,
and I am
a deep thinker.
I think very deeply
about different things.
And I was contraceptives for
many years at that point.
And so my attitude
toward abortion
was that I personally
wouldn't have an abortion.
That was my
personal belief,
even working for
Planned Parenthood,
was that, oh, well,
I wouldn't have an abortion.
But who am I
to tell another woman
what she can do
with her own body?
And I had already
bought into this lie of
my body, my choice.
That's the big saying,
probably all throughout
the world, my body,
my choice.
And so I believe that.
Well, it's not me.
I'm not the one
having the abortion.
So she can do
what she wants to do,
or it's not my business.
But when this
presented itself about
the contraceptive,
hormonal contraceptives
working as
an abortifacian,
I paused and I thought,
OK, this is actually
something I need
to think about.
Because if I'm
contracepting myself
and I've been
contracepting for
many, many years,
on and off for
many years,
could it be possible
that I had had
an early, very
early termination?
And actually, there was
a moment in where God
placed that on my
heart and forced
me to think back
to a time where
I think I may
have had an early
termination while on
hormonal contraception.
And we have to understand
first how hormonal
contraception works
to understand why there
is a potential for
an early termination.
And one of the
ways is it prevents ovulation.
So that's the
first thing.
But when people think,
oh, well, you can't have
an early termination
because you're not
supposed to get pregnant.
But you can get
pregnant while on
contraceptives because
there can be what
we call breakthrough ovulation.
And I don't know
about you or your listeners,
but I know many
babies that have been
born as a result
of someone getting
pregnant while
on contraception.
And that's because
they had breakthrough
ovulation.
And so if this breakthrough
ovulation happens,
when you're using
hormonal contraception,
the uterine lining
is thinned out.
And so you have
a very thin uterine lining,
which makes
implantation difficult.
So if the baby
has already been
conceived, there's
been fertilization.
And so you have
this new life
that could potentially
be aborted because
it's unable to implant
into the uterine wall.
That doesn't mean
that it's going to
happen every time,
but there's the potential
for it to happen.
And if it does,
women don't know
what's happening.
And so that's when
I realized, OK,
it challenged me
on this mindset of,
well, I personally
wouldn't do it.
But what if I'd
been doing it through my
own use of contraception?
And then also I'm
selling contraception to
women and I'm promoting
contraception to women.
So in a sense,
I am also involved
directly in abortions
in a way, right?
And so I think that's
where God led me
gradually through
that process to
think about it from
that perspective.
And then, again, like
I said, just
after that, it was
a gradual process in
which God needed to
lead me to a
point where I
understood that on the
issue of abortion,
I could not take a
position of indifference.
It was black and white.
And I wanted to
believe that I was in
this gray area of,
oh, well,
she can do
what she wants,
but I wouldn't do it.
But no,
if we know that babies
are being taken,
their lives are
being taken,
and we know that
abortion is hurting
women and abortion
is hurting men and abortion
is hurting families,
how can we take a
position of indifference
as our brothers
and sisters in the
womb are being led
to the slaughter?
And that's where God
was leading me
to understand that I
cannot stand by while innocent
human lives are being taken.
You mentioned in
one of your
podcasts, I think,
or somewhere about the
old man who also called
in on the show.
Can you share that,
Yeah, so at the
please?
end of 40 days
after the campaign,
I was still at
Planned Parenthood.
Obviously, my
heart was already
desiring to leave.
I knew I didn't
want to work there anymore.
But because I'm an
adult and I had a
family and, you know,
bills to pay,
I couldn't just quit my
job and leave without
something else, right?
And so we've all
been in that position where,
you know, we have
to be responsible.
And and so I was
really struggling with
how do I just quit
without another job?
I have to have
another job.
So I was waiting,
you know, to find
something else.
But it was I
had a sense of
despair because I thought
I can't go on.
I can't continue here,
but I also can't
quit, you know.
And so it was actually
Easter Tuesday.
So it was after
the campaign ended
on Palm Sunday,
Easter. We
celebrated Easter.
I went to work on
Easter Tuesday.
And and when I
was leaving work,
I was really
upset with God.
And I was kind of
crying out to him as,
you know, telling
him and asking him,
you know, why have
you abandoned me?
I don't understand what
you want from me.
You know, I was upset.
And and when I
pulled into the
driveway at my house,
I turned off the
car and I
turned on the radio
and and there God
would give me my answer.
And there was at
that exact moment,
this elderly gentleman called
in the show and he
was talking about all
the years that he'd spent
praying in front of his
local abortion facility,
which had been like 30
plus years of his life.
And he was just
speaking about how
important it was,
you know, for us
to be there and
how dedicated he was,
you know, to it.
And the radio host,
she replied to him
the words that just
changed me forever.
And she said, at
the end of our lives,
we're all going to
stand before God.
And he's going
to ask you,
did you know
about abortion?
Did you know that
babies were being
ripped from their
mother's wombs limb by
limb at the rate of
over 3000 a day?
In the USA,
it's 3000 babies a
day, approximately,
that die, you
know, via abortion.
And she said,
and then he's
going to ask you,
what did you do?
And when she
said those words,
what did you do?
I just started to cry.
I was sobbing
uncontrollably.
And I realized,
you know,
I I remember
in that moment,
I saw myself as
a little child
standing before God
on Judgment Day.
And I can't I don't
really know why I saw
myself as a little girl.
Right.
But I saw myself as
a little girl standing before
God on Judgment and and
having to try to explain,
you know, yes, I
knew. And God asking, well,
what did you do?
You know, and that's really
when it just hurt
so deeply. It was just
like a sword
piercing my heart.
And I began to just
sob and sob and sob
because I was just
so filled with grief
at realizing in that
moment that I had,
you know,
I had been complicit
in helping these
mothers take the
lives of their babies.
And and that's
really that moment
where I realized
I could never stand
by and do nothing again.
I could not
wash my hands of
the choices that women
were making to take the
lives of their babies.
And that and that's
what I realized is
I just will never
ever be silent again.
And I lacked
the courage,
you know,
to make an effort,
you know, at least
make the effort
to save a life.
And,
you know, if it ended
up where the woman
still chose death,
then that was just
her choice at
that point.
Yes, that was
her choice. But
I could not just
stand by and
be apathetic and indifferent
to it.
Was it hard to
forgive yourself?
Yes. What was
that process like?
Yes, it was easy for
me to receive God's mercy.
That was the easy part
to trust in his mercy.
I think the forgiving
myself has always been
the most difficult part
of this entire journey.
And it took some time.
I don't know how
much time exactly,
but it took some time.
And and every time
that I struggled,
every time satan wanted
to remind me of
what I had done,
especially when I
tried to be outspoken
on this issue,
you know, that's when
satan really went on attack
to remind me of
what I had done.
And then I would just
turn to Christ and
just those words,
Jesus, I trust in
you are really the
words that helped
me get through it.
And then returning
over and over again
to divine mercy.
Jesus, I trust in you.
Trusting in his mercy is
what led me to being
able to trust that
I could also forgive myself.
And was the pro-life
community helpful?
Did they give you
any sort of support?
Yes.
The pro-life community
were absolutely amazing,
especially those involved in
40 days for life.
I don't know that I
could have ever been able
to move forward without
without their support.
They encouraged me when
I quit my job and
we lost almost everything.
But the community donated
a car to our
family because my car
had been repossessed.
The bank repossessed our
car could no longer
make the payments and
they gifted us a car.
And then they were
just there in every
way that they could
be in the beginning
while we transitioned
to not having
that income. But
yeah, they were
always supportive.
And I believe that
I'm here today right
now in Croatia because
of all the prayers of
the faithful who pray
for my protection,
who pray for my safety,
pray for my travels and
just pray for the work
that I continue to do.
I couldn't do it
without the prayers.
You've shared that the
major turning point was
listening to this Catholic
radio while driving.
What's your opinion?
How the media can
be powerful or is it
important to share on
the podcasts or anywhere?
Or even through
social media, yeah.
All the outlets, I
think it's very critical
for us to be able
to do this and important.
And I think one of
the main reasons is
because obviously, one,
you're reaching
more people than you
would otherwise.
But also because
sometimes when people
are struggling,
whether it be with
their faith or
whether it's on this
issue of abortion,
whatever it is, right?
When people
are struggling,
I think it's helpful
for them to be
able to process these
things in private.
For me,
it wasn't a topic I
was willing to discuss
with other people.
I didn't talk about
it with friends.
it with my husband.
I didn't talk about
it with my family.
When I was going
through this process,
I was going through
it alone in the beginning.
And I think it
was helpful to have Catholic
radio, that media there,
to help
walk me through the process
but privately in my car.
I didn't have to
get in any discussions
with people over it.
It was just
straightforward to me,
to my heart. And
it always felt
as if God was
speaking directly to me
through whoever it was that
was on the radio
and whatever program they had.
And so I think
it's very important that we
have the courage to
talk about these topics,
especially on
media outlets.
And what would be
your message to
somebody who maybe
already feels convicted
or at least conflicted?
What would be
your message?
Are you referring to
someone who's working in
the abortion industry?
Yeah, maybe somebody who
needs to quit their job.
It's not an
easy decision.
No. I think it's
difficult and I always want
to be mindful that
we're not all the same.
I think for me,
I have a certain type
of personality in which I
was able to finally just
take that leap of faith.
I also think that
my relationship with
God in that time was
important as well.
Being able to listen
to God audibly too
was very important.
My Catholic faith,
having returned back
to the sacraments
obviously gave me
a lot of strength,
a lot of grace
that I don't think I
would have had otherwise.
So I think it's
going to depend on where
everyone is at in
their life in that moment.
So in that regard,
I always want to
be very mindful
that if someone is
experiencing this,
I don't want
to tell them,
oh, just quit your
job because it's
not that easy.
Even my priest, when
I went to confess
and I told him
where I was working,
even my priest knew
he couldn't just say,
Ramona, you need to
quit your job
right now, tomorrow, whatever.
He said, Ramona,
this is going to be
difficult for you,
but you need to
quit your job as
soon as possible.
And so I think
for someone who is on
the fence, who's worried,
who's maybe experiencing
this conviction going
through this process,
then I would
say turn to God.
And if maybe they're
not a person of faith,
turn to someone
they can trust,
who loves them.
And that way they
know that this person
is going to be
there and be their support.
But I would definitely
say turn to
even the pro-lifers,
because even if you
don't believe in
God or you don't
have that religion,
the pro-lifers are
not going to reject you.
They're still going to
be there to support you
and be your lifeline
if you choose to leave.
But yeah, I would
definitely say turn to people
who are willing to
love you through the process,
because it's not something
that's very easy to do.
And then, of course,
if you are
a person of faith,
then turn to God.
And if you've been living
a life away from God,
then start living your
life toward God again,
because he definitely wants
to receive us
back into his arms.
The other thing that's
important is not
to worry that God
won't forgive you,
because he will.
There's nothing that we
can do that
God cannot forgive us
for when we come
with a contrite heart
asking for his mercy.
Thank you.
Thank you again
for sharing your story.
And
we are almost at
the end of this episode,
but now tell me,
how has your life
changed and what
are you doing now?
Oh, my life has
changed so much.
I would say in many
ways it's still
similar, you know,
but in the most important
ways it's different
in that everything that I
do now is for God.
I used to be someone
who cared about
what people thought,
you know, a little
bit of a people pleaser.
I was afraid, you
know, to rock the
boat, so they say.
And one of the
things that God gave me
through this
conversion was courage.
I found a courage
in myself that I didn't
know that I had,
and I realized that
I had to live
my life with conviction.
And part of that
was not just conviction on
this issue of life,
but also conviction
regarding my faith,
my Catholic faith,
because I realized how
important that was to me.
And so now I live
my life solely caring
about what God
thinks and not
caring about what
anybody else thinks.
And then also,
obviously,
it changed by being because
we were open to life,
we were able to
have more children
because of that.
We have children who
are alive today
that wouldn't be here
otherwise because we
were never going to
have more children.
So I look at
their faces and I think,
you know, wow,
they're here today
because of my conversion.
And I think about the
people who were involved
in 40 Days for Life.
And when we go
out on the
sidewalk and we pray,
we often think
about saving babies
and saving lives.
And I don't know
that anyone has ever really
considered they did
save lives with me.
Not only did they
save my soul,
but look at the
children that are
alive today as a
result, my children.
And so they're here.
Their lives are saved.
They're alive today
because I left the
abortion industry.
So that's another
beautiful way in
which it's changed.
But another is just the
way that I look at
life as a woman
and as a wife
and as a mother.
And I'm also
a grandmother.
Yes. Yes. Thank you.
And so recognizing that that
my role as a wife
and a mother and
grandmother is number one,
that there's
nothing else that's
going to be more
important than that.
Really embracing the
vocation of motherhood,
where before I hadn't
really considered it.
Never give it
any thought.
And I always thought
that my worth and my
value was based off
of what I could contribute
and in other ways,
like outside
of the home,
rather than really recognizing
that my worth
and value was what
I offered inside
the home was what
was most valuable,
not just only to
my own family,
but to the world.
So that's another way
in which it's changed.
But recently,
it will be three
years now in June
since I accepted a
position working with
40 Days for Life on
the national team.
And so I'm the
director of outreach and
I get to do
this wonderful work
of traveling and
visiting vigils,
40 Days for Life vigils
throughout the country
and obviously in
some parts of all
over the world.
And so that has just
been an incredible
gift and privilege.
And it's a beautiful
balance between my work
at home and my
work with 40 Days
for Life because I get
to work from home.
That's awesome.
Great.
Thank you again for
finding time in your
busy schedule for
coming to my podcast
and sharing this
with my listeners.
I know they
will love it.
It's really a story
of redemption,
God's mercy,
hope.
And I hope it will
get to those who
need it at this moment.
Just like that show,
randomly, accidentally,
got to you a few
years ago, right?
Yes. It'll be 14
years on May the 6th.
Yes. So Tuesday,
I believe?
Yeah, this week.
Yeah,
yeah. It'll be 14 years.
Congrats.
Do you celebrate it?
I do.
I do. That's
great. You should.
Okay. We will keep
you in our prayers.
I hope you will
do the same for us.
Thank you to everyone who
stayed with us until the end of this episode.
A special thanks goes to our general sponsor, Angelum
and to this episode’s sponsor, Button World
a small Croatian brand specializing in embroidery,
as you can see on my shirt.
They’re a great example
of what it means to swim
against the current.
How do you
have saying...
Going against the... Put
me on the spot.
Current.
Going against the current.
Yes. That's right.
Check out the episode description
to learn more about what Angelum
and Button World have to offer.
See you in the next episode
Bye!